Performance Tuning | Confluence Data Center and Server 7.9 | Atlassian Documentation
Products
Confluence Support
Documentation
Knowledge base
Resources
Search
Log in
View account
View requests
Log out
...
Knowledge base
Products
Jira Software
Project and issue tracking
Jira Service Management
Service management and customer support
Jira Core
Manage any business project
Confluence
Document collaboration
Bitbucket
Git code management
See all
Resources
Documentation
Usage and admin help
Community
Answers, support, and inspiration
Suggestions and bugs
Feature suggestions and bug reports
Marketplace
Product apps
Billing and licensing
Frequently asked questions
Log out
Log in to account
Contact support
Evaluator resources
Training & Certification
Cloud Migration Center
GDPR guides
Enterprise services
Atlassian partners
Developers
User groups
Automation for Jira
Atlassian.com
Page
View in Confluence
Edit Page
Viewport
Manage Viewport
Confluence
Dashboard
Space Directory
People Directory
Confluence 7.9 (Latest)
Documentation
Unable to load
Atlassian Support
Confluence 7.9
Documentation
Confluence administrator's guide
Performance Tuning
Cloud
Data Center and Server 7.9
Versions
7.9
7.8
7.7
7.6
7.5
7.4
7.3
7.2
7.1
7.0
6.15
6.14
6.13
6.12
See all
Performance Tuning
Confluence administrator's guide
Getting Started as Confluence Administrator
Manage Users
Managing System and Marketplace Apps
Writing User Macros
Customizing your Confluence Site
Integrating Confluence with Other Applications
Managing your Confluence License
Managing Confluence Data
Configuring a Confluence Environment
Configuring Confluence Security
Configuring Confluence
Performance Tuning
Administering Collaborative Editing
Data Collection Policy
Using read-only mode for site maintenance
Administering the Atlassian Companion App
Notifications from Atlassian
On this page
In this section
Cache Performance Tuning
Memory Usage and Requirements
Requesting Performance Support
Troubleshooting Slow Performance Using Page Request Profiling
Compressing an HTTP Response within Confluence
Garbage Collector Performance Issues
Confluence Diagnostics
Related content
No related content found
Still need help?
The Atlassian Community is here for you.
Ask the community
This document describes tuning your application for improved performance. It is not a guide to troubleshooting Confluence outages. Check Troubleshooting Confluence hanging or crashing for help if Confluence is crashing.Like any server application, Confluence may require some tuning as it is put under heavier use. We do our best to make sure Confluence performs well under a wide variety of circumstances, but there's no single configuration that is best for everyone's environment and usage patterns.If you are having problems with the performance of Confluence and need our help resolving them, you should read Requesting Performance Support.Performance Data CollectorThe Performance Data Collector is a server-side, standalone application that exposes a number of REST APIs for collecting performance data. It can be used to collect data, such as thread dumps, disk speed and CPU usage information, to troubleshoot performance problems.See How to use the Performance Data Collector for more information.
On this page:
Use the latest version of your toolsUse the latest versions of your application servers and Java runtime environments. Newer versions are usually better optimized for performance.Avoid swapping due to not enough RAMAlways watch the swapping activity of your server. If there is not enough RAM available, your server may start swapping out some of Confluence's heap data to your hard disk. This will slow down the JVM's garbage collection considerably and affect Confluence's performance. In clustered installations, swapping can lead to a Cluster Panic due to Performance Problems. This is because swapping causes the JVM to pause during Garbage Collection, which in turn can break the inter-node communication required to keep the clustered nodes in sync.Being aware of other systems using the same infrastructureIt may sound tempting: Just have one powerful server hosting your database and/or application server, and run all your crucial programs on that server. If the system is set up perfectly, then you might be fine. Chances are however that you are missing something, and then one application's bug might start affecting other applications. So if Confluence is slow every day around noon, then maybe this is because another application is using the shared database to generate complicated reports at that time? Either make sure applications can't harm each other despite sharing the same infrastructure, or get these systems untangled, for example by moving them to separate instances that can be controlled better.Choice of databaseThe embedded H2 database is provided for evaluating Confluence, not for production Confluence sites. After the evaluation finishes, you must switch to a supported external database. We recommend using what you are familiar with, because your ability to maintain the database will probably make far more difference to what you get out of it than the choice of database itself. Database connection poolIf load on Confluence is high, you may need more simultaneous connections to the database.If you are using JNDI data-sources, you will do this in your application server's configuration files.If you have configured Confluence to access the database directly, you will need to manually edit the hibernate.c3p0.max_size property in the confluence.cfg.xml file in your confluence.home directory. After you have changed the URL in this file, restart Confluence.To assess whether you need to tune your database connection pool, take thread dumps during different times (including peak usage). Inspect how many threads have concurrent database connections.Database in generalIf Confluence is running slowly, one of the most likely cause is that there is some kind of bottleneck in (or around) the database.The first item you should check is the "Database Latency" field in the System Information tab in the admin console.
The latency is calculated by sending a trivial request to the database, querying a table which is known to have only one column and one row.  ("select * from CLUSTERSAFETY"). Obviously this query should be blazing fast, and return within 1 or 2 milliseconds. If the value displayed is between 3 and 5 milliseconds, you might already have an issue. If the value is above 10ms, then you definitely need to investigate and improve something! A few milliseconds may not sound so bad, but consider that Confluence sends quite a few database queries per page request, and those queries are a lot more complex too! High latency might stem from all sorts of problems (slow network, slow database, connection-pool contention, etc), so it's up to you to investigate. Don't stop improving until latency is below 2ms on average.Obviously, latency is just the very first thing to look at. You may get zero latency and still have massive database problems, e.g. if your tables are poorly indexed. So don't let a low latency fool you either.Database statistics and query analyzersModern databases have query optimizers based on collecting statistics on the current data. Using the SQL EXPLAIN statement will provide you information on how well the query optimizer is performing. If the cost estimate is wildly inaccurate then you will need to run statistics collection on the database. The exact command will depend on your database and version. In most cases you can run statistics collection while Confluence is running, but due to the increased load on the database it's best to do this after normal hours or on a week-end.Cache tuning in Confluence and ApacheTo reduce the load on the database, and speed up many operations, Confluence keeps its own cache of data. Tuning the size of this cache may speed up Confluence (if the caches are too small), or reduce memory (if the caches are too big).Please have a look at our documentation on Cache Performance Tuning for information on how to tune Confluence caches.Antivirus softwareAntivirus software greatly decreases the performance of Confluence. Antivirus software that intercepts access to the hard disk is particularly detrimental, and may even cause errors with Confluence. You should configure your antivirus software to ignore the Confluence home directory, its index directory and any database-related directories.Enabling HTTP compressionIf bandwidth is responsible for bottlenecking in your Confluence installation, you should consider enabling HTTP compression. This may also be useful when running an external facing instance to reduce your bandwidth costs.Take note of the known issues with HTTP compression in versions of Confluence prior to 2.8, which may result in high memory consumption.Performance testingYou should try out all configuration changes on a demo system. Ideally, you should run and customize loadtests that simulate user behavior. Access logsYou can find out which pages are slow and which users are accessing them by enabling Confluence's built-in access logging.Built-in profilerYou can identify the cause of page delays using Confluence's built-in profiler according to Troubleshooting Slow Performance Using Page Request Profiling.Application server memory settingsSee How to fix out of memory errors by increasing available memory.Web server configurationFor high-load environments, performance can be improved by using a web server such as Apache in front of the application server. There is a configuration guide to Running Confluence behind Apache.When configuring your new web server, make sure you configure sufficient threads/processes to handle the load. This applies to both the web server and the application server connector, which are typically configured separately. If possible, you should enable connection pooling in your web server connections to the application server.Troubleshooting possible memory leaksSome external plugins, usually ones that have been written a long time ago and that are not actively maintained anymore, have been reported to consume memory and never return it. Ultimately this can lead to a crash, but first this manifests as reduced performance. The Troubleshooting Confluence hanging or crashing guide is a good place to start. Some of the known causes listed there could result in performance issues short of a crash or hang.
Last modified on Oct 15, 2018
Was this helpful?
Yes
No
It wasn't accurate
It wasn't clear
It wasn't relevant
Provide feedback about this article
In this section
Cache Performance Tuning
Memory Usage and Requirements
Requesting Performance Support
Troubleshooting Slow Performance Using Page Request Profiling
Compressing an HTTP Response within Confluence
Garbage Collector Performance Issues
Confluence Diagnostics
Related content
No related content found
Powered by Confluence and Scroll Viewport.
Atlassian
Privacy policy
Terms of use
Security
©
Atlassian
